You tried to do. First, when you got to the office,
was there each morning? Like Doctor Williams used
to have his they had his paperwork for him to sign
first. What did? I think basically that was it, was
get the paperwork. But generally I was not a good
dictator, so I hand wrote most of my papers and
things of this sort. I introduced the policy of
reply by note. In other words, somebody would send
me a letter, and I'd insist that they just have one
point into that note, yes, no, and I'd put a xerox
it, and it goes. Well, that took care of a lot of the
responsibility in the mail. During those years,
who were your key office staff members? Mary Ruth
Patronella had to be listed as one. Describe her
work.
She probably knows more about the College of
Agriculture today and then than anyone else. And
Elizabeth
Williamson was a person. These are two staff
people that I've worked with.
Curtis Lard was in there and Dick Potts.
Bill Pope. Did you appoint Ms. Patronella to?
Yeah, I appointed her. I was associate director of
the station, so I asked her to come over to be my
secretary. And Dr. Patterson liked her, and so he
moved her over to the dean's office. And so when I
made dean, I moved over and joined her again.
Describe her manner. HER MANNER IS ONE OF QUIET
CONFIDENCE AND KNOWLEDGE. SHE'S BRIGHT.
Vader is assistant to the dean. I had a little
trouble doing that because some of the folks that
were running the
classification system were
What was her manner of letting you know that she
thought you might have made a mistake in a letter?
She'd tell me. Is that right? Yes. She says, I think
you want to change this. Elizabeth Williamson did
that too. She says, I think you want to change this.
Did they have a good sense of humor? Oh, yes. And I
didn't mind it. You need to know me as a person. I
generally... There are certain things that just
irritated me. Such as? We can't do it. And any time I
says, oh, you can't do it, and I'd say, why? And if
the answer wasn't good, I'd blow my top. But I'd
cool down. In that way, I was a little like John. And
so if things basically irritated me, My ire was
well known as far as this is concerned. When you
left the office each day, each work day, did you
take paperwork home with you? I took a briefcase
home, but I didn't open it. Okay. What did you do in
the evenings to relax? Well, I eventually came to
the point where I was following TV and Had a drink or
two. Do you have any hobbies? Any relaxation
activities? No, the only hobby I have is probably a
little of photography when I take trips and things
of that sort. Because you're not a hunter, fisher,
golfer, tennis. I'm not a hunter, fisher, golfer
or anything of the sort. And you don't have a farm or
anything like that? No. Let's see, church goer?
Church goer. Where? Holy Cross Lutheran Church.
Is that Evangelical or Missouri? That's
Missouri. Missouri Synod. And you grew up in
Missouri Synod? I grew up in Missouri Synod. I've
been a lifelong Missouri Synod member. During
those 20 years, about what percentage of the time
were you on the road?
At least 10% of the time. And where are some of the
places overseas you went?
Wherever we had a project going. South America,
Sri Lanka, Africa,
Saudi Arabia. Well, only one trip to Saudi Arabia.
No, but I mean, did you go to East Pakistan,
Bangladesh? I went to East Pakistan or
Bangladesh, yes. Ever have any narrow escapes or
scary moments on any of those trips? Yes. Where?
Well, my wife and I were in Africa, and we were...
Flying back to Nairobi,
in Kenya, and the plane stopped off at a
resort place just across the border. And we had a
Coke. The pilot was one of them. It turned out that a
lady decided to go with us, and she had more baggage
than anything else, so we turned out to be an
overweighted plane.
And as we took off, there were three topis.
Antelope. Excuse me.
And... The pilot says, well, usually they get out
of the way. We'll see what they do. And so we did, and
the plane came up along with them. As the plane
caught up with them, one went this way, one went
into the plane. And the squawk button went off and
things of the sort.
We landed. We landed. in between spaces in a
hard-bark place, but we came back and we found out
that the plane was
grounded because they had, the wheels were pushed
aside.
Oh, there were some interesting ones that I had. I
went into, I was going into Africa and I joined my
stepfather and
mother-in-law, stepfather, mother-in-law,
mother-in-law.
We landed at Johannesburg Airport and we were
waiting, we were going up to Victoria Falls.
And they wouldn't take off. until late when we got
there, we found that Zambian terrorists had shot
up the airport.
So I guess there are a few things of that sort to do.
Any zany experiences on any one of those trips?
Goofy? I'm sorry? Any zany, goofy? I don't know. On
any of those trips?
Who are some of the celebrities that you met?
Most of the people were the people in the, well,
celebrities. Like you, emperors, kings? No, I
didn't. I did, as a result of a project, go down and
meet Borgiba, who was president of Tunisia at one
time. That was down in Houston.
We were about to meet with Queen Elizabeth and
Prince Philip at Kandy, Sri Lanka, but we were
called back to Colombo beforehand, so we missed
that opportunity. In overseas work, were there
any projects that we missed that you wish we had
been able to participate in? Any near misses?
Well, I think there was a couple that we missed. I
thought we should have gone into Kenya and
Edgerton College and worked with those folks.
We had a later opportunity to go with the
agricultural, Bangladesh Agricultural
University to go back in, and I think we missed
that. Which of all those are you most proud to which
of the projects? Oh, I think the Bangladesh
Agricultural University is the one that they had
the greatest impact in. But I think as far as
foreign programs are concerned was the ones when
we brought these young people in from the
Dominican Republic. And they generally went home
and the Aggie Club became a political force.
And will be for years. Here,
in your long service, of what are you most proud
here at A&M for your years of service?
Well, I think the research and extension center
complex, which I put into place and focused on. I
think the movement of the College of Agriculture
to the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
literally, not just by name only, is one that I'm
particularly proud of. I think that in the later
years after being dean, to establish, to work with
and be a sort of a godfather to the movement of
agricultural ethics in the country,
that particular movement.
I think some of the early graduate work,
undergraduate students that I advised,
I'm particularly proud of.
Proud because of what they've gone on to achieve?
What they've gone on to do as far as this is
concerned. How did Aggie students change during
your years here? The fundamental change It's a
curious one, I can't explain it.
When the students came back after World War II and
taught, and then back in the 50s taught,
the students were, they would go to class. They'd
take 15, 16, 17 hours, take a full load.
I'd drink a beer every once in a while, but that
would be about it. They were very serious
students.
Today, students take no more than 12 hours. They
just as soon have a class in which they don't have to
go to class, the student. Their education, what
they seek from education, is not the same thing
that we thought, or that the students in the 50s and
60s thought. They were seeking technical
knowledge. The students here today are probably
self-educating themselves or educating
themselves more individually, which means,
obviously, that a residential university is far
better than this business of distance learning or
whatever you want to call it.
I think that
In some ways, I guess they haven't changed, but
there are some that are very interested in hard
working and things of this sort. There are some
that have the major ability that they can grasp
points.
Am I right? Oh, I think so. And also, I want to reach
back. You mentioned people like Dick Potts and
Curtis Lard. What was special about them?
counselors, advisors like that? Well,
particularly Dick Potts. He believed that you
helped people get through college. And even if you
put a dunderhead out, that dunderhead you'd never
have to be embarrassed
by. And I guess basically he was right.
Am I correct that he knew when to make an exception
to the rule and when not to? That's correct, yeah.
And he was always patient? He was always patient.
Let's see, other proud moments of all your years at
A&M?
Any big research projects that you're
particularly proud to have been a part of? My
research really never came to fruition. But for
the college, what about? Oh, for the college, the
biggest one is the so-called conversion project,
where they took the grain sorghums of various
sundry places and converted them just to things
that could be used.
could be used for in crops and breeding and things
of the sort for the United States. I think that the
major contribution that we did as far as the
university is concerned is to change the
structure
of animal breeding, the meats projects as we have.
And currently, I think the introduction of
molecular biology in the university I'm
particularly happy with.
In hindsight, did we miss some opportunities?
Probably. In agriculture? Probably. Such as?
Who knows? We missed them. But so you don't have
anything kind of filed away in your brain, oh, I
wish we had known. I wish we had done so and so. Yeah.
No, we did the best we could as far as it's
concerned, probably. There were some things that
we couldn't do. We didn't do as well as, for
example, we couldn't do biochemistry as well as
other places did. We missed some things in
building a strong nutrition program and a human
nutrition program. And I started because we had no
history of home economics where human nutrition
was in the play. As far as you know, when Mr. Rutter
apparently decided we're going to give real
emphasis to chemistry and economics.
Were there any other areas that might have gotten
his attention like those two did? No, I thought
that was a good decision. And I'm assuming he
thought that agriculture engineering didn't
need that special attention. That's right. He was
looking for the future where he could make it. If
you don't mind to cut this off, I'm going to call my
daughter real quick. I don't know. I
see some things that bother me a little bit right
now. Do you want to mention what they are? Well, I
think the biggest problem that I see is that I
remember the halcyon days of John Conley and Earl
Rudder. And I do mention John Conley in that
particular situation, where higher education in
Texas was being supported largely. Today, higher
education is squeezed. And in the process of
squeezing, There is a beginning to be concerned
among faculty members that the current
organization is at fault.
And if we had a department of food science, food
science would fare better. We don't need to have
the traditional animal husbandry because what we
need to do is to have
the scientific areas. Let's establish genomics,
animal genomics, and use the genomics of
nutrition and things of the sort. But maybe
they're right. But what bothers me fundamentally
is that there is a... a movement to establish a
school of natural biosciences or natural
resources, renewable natural resources.
Essentially, I tried to get such a thing called to
get the Institute of Renewable Natural Resources
or something of that sort years ago.
It never worked because the heads of departments
and the faculty didn't want to have another
administrative unit in between themselves and
the administrators, that is the directors of the
experiment station.
But now with the shortage of money, maybe we can get
more money if we have a school. They may be right.
But essentially, where is the future? Who's
sitting down to look at the future as far as
agriculture is concerned? Who's sitting down to
look at the future as far as science is concerned?
And until the little green book says we've got to
look at the future, we've got a changing future
that we have to do. So it bothers me a lot. And the
problem is the older faculty. They don't want to
change. If you were hired as the consultant to
Texas A&M University today, what advice would you
give it and its leaders about moving forward?
Well, I would say, Do what you're doing now, but
still don't give up the older traditional parts of
the university that may be a part of it. In other
words, sit down and look at.
And don't do it with a group of people. Don't do it
with a whole faculty. Do it with leaders. Do it with
small groups of people. Wherein you can have 18
people was probably a maximum number as far as the
research group of the century study. But you see,
those things, those kinds of discussions aren't
being done today.
And there's just as many big problems out there as
there are now.
A large number of the faculty come from places that
don't know about land grant universities and
don't know about the service aspects of things.
And right now, with the Bush administration
moving toward NIH,
particularly doing the research of NIH and
squeezing everything else, How best in today's
world could the research and teaching and service
in agriculture, how could those functions best be
put together?
Well, theoretically they're put together where
they ought to be right now. Is the current
organization, is that the way you'd have it?
That's right. But the problem is, are the people
the right people? Now, Heiler has hired two people
up front, which I have a high regard for. Charles
Seifrich, he brought back, and Fuller Baser. By
the way, Fuller Basler is one of these that you have
to consider as being one of the stars we brought in.
You have those two people there. But now
Extension, we don't have the same kind of
leadership in Extension. A visionary kind of
thing. All right, would you have the chief
academic administrator reporting both to the
president and to the chancellor? It can be done. Is
that the best way? That's the best way.
What advice would you have to A&M's leadership
about size? Should A&M be larger or smaller? in its
enrollment and programming? I wish I knew the
answer to that. As long as we were growing, we could
do some things. The minute we put a cap on, you begin
to put limits and you have to set priorities. And
those priorities, are they the right priorities?
I don't know. I don't think so.
But is there the same kind of of unity, of feeling
with 44,000 that there used to be? Oh, no. No. The
faculty is more independent and more dispersed.
For example, during the work day, if you wanted to
walk across the campus encounter some other
faculty members, where did you go? You want to go
have coffee?
Well, I don't know. Did you all used to go to the MSC?
We used to go to the MSC, but they don't do it
anymore. We have coffee here, as far as it's
concerned. When they designed this building, I
put a lounge in here. And with the idea that somehow
the faculty could get together. It never worked.
It didn't work because somebody wanted a living
room. They wanted a place to bring people in. They
wanted to have meeting rooms rather than societal
situations. There's this great fear that the
faculty is going to get lazy and do some other
things. All right, now we're backing up. In 1988,
when you left the dean's function, did you retire
at that point? No, I came over as a full-time
faculty. As a full-time faculty. And who
succeeded you? Charles Harnson. Did he or anyone
else ask you for any advice at that point? As far as I
know, he was advised not to seek my advice. Oh, I
see, I see. Which I think was an error because I
didn't think that, I didn't think as differently
from him as some people might have. Now, and did you
have, the timing of your ceasing as dean, was that
caused by your having some disagreements with
somebody? No, I was 65 years old. Oh, so it's a 65.
Okay. And so they decided, and basically they,
okay, he's 65, we ought to get on, we need to put the
dean's job and the director's job and the deputy
chancellor's job, or title at least, in one place.
And those were separated at that point, I think.
And it took them a decade or so to put them back
together? I think it was all right to put them back
together. No, no, but it took them 10 years, didn't
it, to put them back together? Yes. What have we not
talked about that we should have? I've run out of
topics that I've thought of. Well, I think I have
expressed most of my feelings as far as this is
concerned, most of my thinking. I think that Texas
A&M still has some possibilities. of becoming
great, it may change its character.
I really don't know what colleges of agriculture
ought to be in the future. And I'm thinking of that
more than anything else. I know what universities
ought to be in the future. And that's generally an
organization without a college of agriculture.
And so colleges of agriculture who want to survive
have to fit within that particular conceptual
basis of being in a university as far as that's
concerned. And who has done that best? Cornell? I
don't think anybody has done it best. Okay.
All right. Back to you again personally.
Individual special moments that are your
greatest pleasures while you were, was it getting
that watch? Yes. I had, of course, this was my
second watch. This was administration. I got one
as teaching. Oh, okay. Yes, that was it. Recently,
last fall,
I was named one of the outstanding graduates of
Texas A&M's College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences. That's splendid.
I think, looking back upon the Research and
Extension Center concept, I think changing the
name of the college to College of Agriculture and
Life Sciences
And there were some things that I tried I thought
were pretty good ideas, but they were quite sold.
For example, I tried to get people to think about
the Master of Agriculture as a system sort of like
an MBA program. But science so dominates the
thinking of faculty that
To whom do you feel greatest gratitude for your A&M
years?
People that helped you, that made your work? Well,
the first person would be
Pearson.
Paul Pearson. He was the first head of the
Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition. He was
dean of graduate college at that particular
point. Carl Lyman probably helped me as much as
anybody. Jack Miller.
Obviously
Earl Rudder.
Leon S. Bill Pope.
Jack Williams. I'd even listen to her in that
crowd.
Alright, summarize your feelings about A&M in a
sentence or so. Well, I think it's an institution
that is